>> Prayer for the Earth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Let us just see
it simply, enough
to drink in the
spring's radiance.
The yellow Scotch broom
against green fields
allow our eyes to
reach into the morning.
Like fingers into
wet grass, our tears
falling into April's rain.
We've been too long away
and the need is huge,
our desire unsteady
in this time.
Let the invisible wanting burst
to the surface of our skin
where we may know this world
who holds us so dearly,
even in the middle
of our blindness
and in the beginnings
of our awakening.
Let us lying face
down in her beauty,
feeding her with our gratitude.
She is waiting.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WATER RUNNING]
[CHIMES TINKLING]
This is the cockpit
where I work.
That's my grandpa
and that's my mom.
My grandpa was, during
his years in Los Angeles,
who worked the orange orchards.
And he was a great mechanic
so he built a speedboat,
and he built skis that some
say were the first water
skies in Southern
California that he
saw in Italian magazine.
And so my mom was one
of the first people
to water ski from Mainland
to Catalina Island, 26-miles
of open ocean, when she was 17.
She was a tough cookie.
[CHUCKLES]
My mother, she gave
me to my grandfather
who was pulling back
from the non-edict world,
from the white world.
He was born in 1894, and he
came out here to Los Angeles
when he was 16, 1910.
Attempted to assimilate,
did fairly well,
but saw the values were not
his values, so he pulled out,
bought a little piece of
land on the Stanislaus
River, Sierra Nevada.
And my mom gave me to
him when I was five.
She said I gave you to dad
and I said, your way of life
is in danger.
You raise this kid so
it doesn't go away.
So he taught me how
to be with the land,
he taught me how
to feel the Earth,
how to be with animals
wild and domestic, both.
So, yeah I got a very
traditional upbringing
from him.
As I came up into High
School, I didn't really
know what to do with my
grandfather, teacher.
Because the whole
world around me
had a different value system.
And I didn't believe in
that place, it wasn't mine.
In my lifetime, certainly in
my grandfather's lifetime,
we grew up on a river
that we watched die.
We watched the spread, we
watch the Box Stores come.
We watched herds
of deer diminish,
become smaller and smaller.
Flocks of birds were, you know,
you might be out in the field
and see 7 or 800
blackbirds take off at once
and go across the sun.
And we watched that
become 6, 5, 4, 3, 200,
now you're lucky
if you see it 20.
So all that stuff
on climate change
just blows my mind that
people are in shock about this
because my elders
have been telling me
about this my entire life.
So now, all of a sudden,
people are waking up
because their science
tells them what's
right in front of their face.
It just boggles the mind.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
All right, so now
we're in dire straits
and the question is what about
TEK, Traditional Ecological
Knowledge, or indigenous wisdom?
The picture of indigenous wisdom
that people are projecting
is their own picture of
what was happening here,
in terms of
sustainability, before they
came along and
screwed everything up
with their predatory nature.
And their right to maintain
that predatory nature.
That it was God-given
manifest destiny
in whatever shape or form that
predatory nature has taken.
The proof of its un-workability
we're completely surrounded by.
Now people are listening
because their own picture
of their own future
is threatened.
So it's a bit ironic to reach
out to Native people now
to save their butts.
The indigenous wisdom
that's really needed
is how have we
survived a 95% to 98%
population reduction in a
really short period of time.
They eliminated, through
massacre, starvation,
disease from starvation,
90% of the population
of California Indians
between 1848 and about 1875.
So we're talking
about one generation.
One generation.
So how if California
Indians managed
to survive that
degree of destruction?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
To really study the genocide,
to study what happened here
is a process of coming
to a point of humility.
As long as they are
not willing to deal
with the human cause and
the cost in all of life
that they've created
with that attitude,
taking that same predatory
attitude and saying,
well, now I want Indigenous
wisdom is really offensive.
And it's not going to work.
It will not work.
Dr. Kyle Whyte, the Potawatomi
scholar, says, you know,
unless we come back to right
relationship, to kinship,
we're not going to
get to the solutions
that we need long-term.
There has been so
much destruction
of right relationship
across the board
that that's going to take time.
So, within that, there's
going to be a lot of loss.
That's where the tears are and
they're the proper reaction.
They are the proper reaction.
If we cannot be sorrowful
for what's happening and what
continues to happen, then
we've lost our humanity.
This is the real
Indigenous wisdom.
Everybody needs to
stop and take a look
and say, how did we get here?
How does our treatment of
Turtle Island and its people,
and its creatures
show us what we
need to learn about ourselves.
This is the Indigenous wisdom
that people need to focus on,
not their imagined
picture of sustainability.
No, I'm not a person that
believes the whole propaganda
that humans are
followed by nature.
The huge mistakes
that humans are
making right now, as
far as I'm concerned,
are cultural not
intrinsic to human nature.
If we really educate ourselves
and we really learn about this,
and we really listen and look
and feel what's happening,
the tears are
enormous sometimes.
But don't stop there, there's
too much work to be done.
And having that communication
with Indigenous people
is part of that.
Because nobody is going to
get in their canoe and row
back over to Europe.
We've got to figure out how
to do it here, together, now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]